.. post:: April 15, 2021
   :author: Keri Sime

Managing a Machine Learning Project
====================================

There is a plethora of data science blog posts, including my own, which
demonstrate how to create a machine learning (ML) model. Generally, they
cover how to import the data, split it into to test and train datasets,
fit the model then make predictions and evaluate the quality. This is
all very well but the challenging part, and what you spend most of your
time doing, is setting up the project and preparing the data. Not to
mention the process of working with stakeholders and ideally monitoring
ongoing performance.

Traditionally I haven’t been one for doing a lot of planning before
starting a project. I’d just grab the data and get coding. However, I’ve
now been burnt just enough times to now take planning seriously. It’s
unrealistic to expect to have a useable product after having a one-line
request from your manager, grabbing some data and then coding something
up. To this effect, I’ve put a few steps below which should help ensure
that the modelling done is firstly useable and secondly done a minumum
number of times. I work in marketing so the examples used relate to
marketing use cases.

Step 1 - Establish the Business Case
------------------------------------

It is essential to really understand what is needed by the business and
if machine learning is even required. If a rules based model can do the
job then use this. My approach is to employ the simplest techniques
available to me which saves the business time and resources. Also,
stakeholders are more likely to trust and use something more
understandable. Furthermore, when you move on the person that inherits
your work may not have your same advanced skillset so will struggle to
maintain it. Generally, it’s important to keep in mind that the
investment in any one project needs to be consumerate with the expected
business benefit.

To establish the needs of the business you’re going to have to get out
there and consult with your stakeholders. The work you are doing should
help them improve their outcomes which they understand through and
through. To be blunt, if you are designing period products then you need
to talk to someone who has a period. Same goes in business, don’t assume
you know how it works. Also, you need stakeholder support to get your
project rolled out. It’s much easier to get your work accepted if they
have been consulted and given input from the start.

So what do you need from the stakeholders? You need to understand the
wider business context, the specific problem in detail and how the model
will actually be used to fix this problem. For example, will a churn
model feed into a process for targeting new customers or for retention
purposes? If you’re replacing an existing model then look at what has
already been done and how it preforms before you get started. However,
just because there is something to refer to, don’t neglect to go back
and talk to your stakeholders as the current solution might not be
suitable.

On the flip side, don’t blindly let the business tell you what they
need. You might be dealing with someone that has been reading some hype
on the internet and think that they need such-and-such a model using
such-and-such data. In this case, it’s important to probe and ask the
person really specific questions about what they are trying to achieve
and explain to them why your approach will do the job if it’s different.

At this stage you should also establish any pay-off matrices. Having a
relatively too high cost associated with a wrong decision may render an
‘average’ quality model useless. Or in some cases a very low cost of
getting it wrong might mean that there is no point even doing the
modelling.

Step 2 - Frame the Project
--------------------------

How are you actually going to set the model up? If you are trying to
predict customer churn, for example, you’ll have to choose a time period
over which they churn. Are you looking at, say, 3-month or 12-month
churn rates? Also, think about what data you’re going to use to train
on. Are you going to use the last 12 months or the last 5 years? If
you’re using the last 5 years, you need to consider if there have been
any changes that could impact customer behaviour over that period. In
that case, you might need to shorten the period over which you collect
the training data.

You need to determine which data you’re going to use and how you’re
going to access it. You may need to look into purchasing some data or it
might just take time to get access to data which is sitting somewhere
inaccessible. There’s also the option of government data including
census data and other open source datasets. When choosing data you need
to think about the timing of the availability for the prediction
dataset. If you are modelling churn then you don’t want to include
information from the phone call which was made at the point of churn. Or
if you data source has unreliable delivery times it may not be suitable.

It’s important to consider the legal as well as the ethical implications
of using certain data sources. Just because it is legal, it doesn’t mean
it’s a good idea to use it. If you’re using your customer data you will
need to look at the Terms & Conditions they’ve agreed to but you also
need to consider the national legal framework you’re operating under.
Many external data sources come with Terms & Conditions as well. For the
ethics, you’ll have your own view point but it’s important to liaise
with your stakeholders and abide by company policy.

Once you have framed the project, I encourage you to actually explain
this to someone else. The process of explaining the project, even in an
email, forces you to really think through what you are doing. Also, this
person might find a hole in your thinking. It’s better to find out now
then after you’ve put in weeks of work.

Step 3 - Prepare the Data
-------------------------

Once you’ve collected the data, do exploratory data analysis to check
the data quality and understand the distribution of the variables. This
will save you having to redo the modelling process later when you
realise the input data quality is causing unexpected results. If there
are too many null values then don’t use it, if there is little
variability in the data then it’s not going to be very useful. You don’t
need the same level of data preparation as you would for a statistical
model but I see little point inlcuding poor quality data especailly if
it is expensive or difficult to collect. Also, looking at the
distribution of the variables may indicate if it is worth applying a
power transformation so that data is less skewed.

Some platforms will handle null values but I think that you should
handle null values yourself as you will be able to do this in a nuanced
way that the platform cannot. So for example, if you have location based
data, impute relative to location. Think property values - land value
will be similar in similar areas. This is better than the median land
value being imputed across the whole country. Or you can use census data
to impute missing data. For example, age can be replaced with median age
from the census in a given area. Or if you want to impute missing
information about pensions in census data then you could use a simple
linear regression model using age as an input variable.

Step 4 - Fit and Evaluate the Model
-----------------------------------

You’re now ready for the fun bit but don’t be surprised if you end up
cycling back into other steps. Make sure you measure the impact on the
final business outcome not just checking the perfomance on the test
dataset. So for example, if your model leads to excluding leads from
aqcuisition lists then you want to know how many leads will be excluded.
If it’s too many then the sales agents won’t have anyone to call!

If the model performance is poor, you can fine tune the parameters but
this can only do so much. You can also consider creating a simpler
model. So, for example, instead of trying to predict when a customer
goes into bad debt, try to predict simply if they go into bad debt at
all. You may also have to look at sourcing some more data.

Before sharing your model with the business, it’s a good idea to get a
detailed peer review of your model including the data preparation
stages. Looking through other people’s work, I’ve sometimes been
surprised by errors made that would have been picked up if someone else
had had input in the project. We all make mistakes and as much as it’s
hard to take criticsm, I’d rather that then roll out a poor quality
model that costs the business money. Plus it takes some pressure off
yourself as you’ve got someone else taking at least some of the
responsiblity for the project.

Another consideration is using A/B testing. Depending on the project,
this may be a useful step in the evaluation process.

Step 5 - Present the Model to Stakeholders
------------------------------------------

Present the model and its impacts to your stakeholders before rolling
anything out. If you have stayed in touch with them through out the
project then there won’t be any big surprises and therefore pushback.
They won’t be interested in what algorithm you have run but they will be
interested in how deploying the model will affect them and their
objectives. So keep it light on the data science jargon and present it
relative to the business context and how it will affect business
outcomes.

Step 5 - Deploy and Monitor the Model
-------------------------------------

Simply deploying the model is not enough, performance needs to be
monitored over time. Also, the model itself will need to be refreshed
periodically. The frequency of refreshing the model will depend on the
business case and any changes in the underlying context.

Conclusion
----------

I hope this post provides some food for thought and help you to
streamline your modelling process. This steps above clearly have a
marketing bent but no doubt there is overlap in other domains. It may
even be worth distilling this into a checklist, keeping it relevant to
your particular context.
